Jenson's Othello Essay

The play 'Othello' relates to various flaws and strengths within ourselves causing us to think and feel:this is why it has lasted to this day. Othello shows the innate
ego-centric within each one of us, obsessed with his intriguing past and title. Iago is the cunning thinker and tactician within ourselves, so understanding that he lacks 
interpersonal empathy. The greatest thought provoker is Shakespeare's decision to express the supernatural within Iago, rather than an external object, like the witches of 
Macbeth and Ghosts of Hamlet.

Everyone can relate to Othello's desire to affirm his worth in social situations. In Othello's conversation with the senators he states "My parts, my title, my perfect 
soul shall manifest me rightly". Personal pronouns show an exaggerated self-consciousness and reference to his title shows his need to prove himself, connecting to the 
theme of reputation. His verbal ability is shown in "O heavy hour. Methinks that the sun and moon should eclipse and that the affrightened globe shall yawn in alteration."
His verbose psyche is shown in the lyrical, stately and formal phrase. The connection to the machinery of the universe and human nature through the personification of the globe
shows an earthy intriguing character. Therefore the audience feels. Modesty is shown in his pleading tone in "I am little blessed with the soft phrase of peace" relating to our 
need to be modest. Othello is liked by the audience, because he acts in a way that society tells us to: modesty and confidence.

The exotic history and persona of Othello makes the audience feel his story and life. War is not merely a trade for Othello, it is a passion; he describes it as "a world of tented fields
plumed troops and shrill trumps." The sensory imagery, especially the sense of sound, stirs the reader's attention and creates interest. The exotic place of origin is alluded to by Othello
explaining a "world of cannibals, blemmyae, vast antres, heaven touching hills and arid deserts." The figurative language of "heaven touching hills" shows how people can inflate or exaggerate
memories to gain the respect of others, casuing them to think and feel. Immense ego-centricity is shown in Othello's avowal for Desdemona's love " she loved me for 
the dangers I had passed, and I loved her that she did not pityb them." This shows that Othello loves the idea of loving more than Desdemona because he says "she did not pity them"
or himself. This relates to the theme of objectifyng love. The exotic past of Othello is greatly used in his final speech where he tries to reaffirm his position referring
to "Arabian gums" and "malignant turks". The lyrical and florid language is suggestive that Othello is trying to prove himself once again. As an audience we think and feel 
for Othello because we see ourselves within him.

Iago is an embodiment of the thinker within every one of us. In a conversation with Desdemona he states " She that was fair but never proud, held her tongue at will and 
was never loud. Never lacked gold, and never went gay." The antithesis and parallelism, in combination with the symetrically balanced sentences shows the cool self awareness
and conscious calculation that typifies all that Iago says and does." The reader sees the psychopath or the insensitive of her/himself within Iago; especially the feeling 
 of love described as "Carnal strings" and 'a lust for the blood and a permission of the will." The reference of human feeling being related to the machinery of technology 
shows Iago's uttmost disassociation with the human feelings of love. Reputation is equally foreign to Iago , calling it an "idle and most false impostion. Lost without 
deserving and gained without merit." This statement scolds the principle of meritocracy showing his belief in the idea that it is worthless. We still study Iago because 
it is a character we see in the outside world and within ourselves, especially with the Marchiavellian style politicians such as Donald Trump and Kim Jong Ill.

The most though provoking aspect of 'Othello' is the characterisation of Iago as a manifestor of dark energy and his nihilist attitudes. The dramatic form of night scenes 
in act 1.1, 2.3 and 5.1 Iago dominates each of these scenes. Iago causes Othello to have a seizure after using mainpulation which is a major symptom of demonic intoxication.
When Othllo is suffering a seizure Iago calls on the powers of "the divinity and hell" to guide his actions. The use of christian purgatory jargon shows Iago's beliefs in the dark forces
of "Darkness and night to give birth to the world's monstorous light." The use of imagery and rhyming prose shows a static clear image of darkness that characterises
Iago. Afet the seizure, Othello adopts Iago's demonic langauge style to the extent of having no object or meaning, "not a jot not a jot" and "damn her lewd minx". The lack
lack of an object shows a lack of control over himself, common in demonism. The audience feels fear, as Iago remind them of the innately evil in Humanity...