Shakespeare takes us on an emotional rollercoaster throughout Othello. He makes us hate one character, Love another, only for it to be reversed at the end of the play. The character that makes us think and feel the most in Othello is Iago. Iago will do anything to reach his goal. Ambition is the driving factor behind all of his actions and decisions in the play and whilst that is admirable, the fact that he uses his ambition for murder makes us feel hatred towards him. Iago uses manipulation and duplicity to achieve his goals his manipulation of those around him and the control he has over other peoples emotions leave us wondering why he used his talents for such terrible purposes. Iagos duplicity almost takes on a demonic stance, his outward self, hiding what truly lies within.

Iago is great at controlling other characters, and to an extent, the audiences emotions. The power of Iagos manipulation astounds everyone. Andrea Oberheiden states that “Iago is an intelligent character who uses his tactical deftness to control others”. Iago certinatley lives up to this claim, he makes Rodrigo put on a disguise to humiliate passion and turns Othello into a nervous wreck. “if i can but fasten one cup upon him…he will be as quarrelsome and full of offense as my young mistresses’ dog”. Iago understands what he can do to cassio is ge gets hum drunk and uses this to his full advantage. The simile in the above passage “as my young mistresses’ dog” highlights the derision he feels for cassio likening him to a childs quarrelsome pet. Iago makes us think about which different people in our life could do the same to us and question our friendships with others. 

Imagos duplicitous haute is a ever relevant theme in “othello” and Iago makes the reader think twice about how we see other people. Iago nature is demonic, his outward self not revealing his inner devil. Iago is so good at this he makes Othello still think of him as “honest Iago” until the very end acts. This oxymoron highlighting how good Iago is at what he does. Iago duplicitous nature is revealed to the audience in the opening acts. “i am not what i am”. Shakespeare uses antithesis in this passage to reveal how Iagos appearance, is not the reality. This quote also gives the audience a sense of dramatic irony as we, the audience know lagos plans however the rest of the characters do not. Iago changes the way we think and feel about other people through his duplicitous nature. 

Iago ambition is the driving factor behind all of his decisions and actions throughout the play. he is so focused in his goal that he doesn’t care about the damage he causes in the process. “in following him i follow but myself”. This lack of conscience almost boardering on psycopathic, allows iago to do anything to complete his take, that is , to takedown othello. This characterisation is used by Shakespeare to elicit an emotional response from the audience and heighten the tragedy that befalls othello. If the crime that Iago had committed been a crime of passion, a crime in which he was so overcome be jealousy and hatred that he had killed othello, it could be said that the audience would be filled with less hatred than what he did, which was plan, and calculate othello downfall from the opening acts. The face that he planned the murder from the start means that the audience are filled with overriding contempt and anger towards Iago. 

Iago professional jealousy also links to his ambition and is used by shakespeare to illicit and emotional response from the audience. Iago jealousy is different from Othellos. Othello jealousy, just like his character, is overpowering and at times for the other characters, frightening. Iagos jealousy, however; is way more controlled and, like his character, planned out and careful. Iago only reveals his jealousy to the audience, in his asides. “i hate the moor, and it is thought that twit my sheets has done my office, i know not is for surety but i, for mere suspicion in that kind will think of it as surety.” This creates a sense of dramatic irony again in the play, as the audience know about this jealousy is used by shakespeare to enhance the emotions that are felt by the audience. 

Shakes makes us feel sympathetic towards othello as shakespeare portrays his downfall through his language. At the start of the play, othello speaks in eloquent sentences that the claim that he is “rude in speech” seism a bit out of order. However, once lagos manipulation takes hold, othellos language descends into one liners such as “ha” and “O misery”. The exclamation sued by othello highlights the affect of Iagos jealousy and also heightens the emotion felt towards othello. Iagos actions in the play and the effect they have on other characters make us feel only more hatred towards him. 

Shakespeare’s Othello lasts because of the way the different characters make us feel. Iago is portrayed as ambitious psycopathic demon who will stop at nothing to achieve his goal. Othello is portrayed as a noble general corrupted by jealousy and manipulation. All this is used by shakespeare to make the audience leave the theatre (or the classroom) feeling emotionally drained after what they have just watched. Shakespeare’s plays last not only because they force us to think and feel, but also because they lave a lasting affect on the audience. 