Empathy is just another part of human nature. The play 'Othello' by William Shakespeare is an ideal example. It forces the audience tothink about their own lives and it allows them to feel deep emotion. This is especially effective in Act 1 Scene 1 and Act 5 Scene 2, and is further emphasised by how Shakespeare's characters are constructed.

"I will play the swan and die in Music" (Act 5 Scene 2). Emilia's last words after being stabbed by her husband Iago are in no doubt full of emotion. This quote relies on the audience having a knowledge of the way swans die- in a songful tune. Shakespeare chose this quote to evoke a strong, tragic emotion in the audience. Using the image of a dying swan to represent Emilia's death remantisises and makes her final momnets beautiful and memorable to the audience. She begins to sing: "Willow, willow, willow" and later states: "I speak as I think, I die, I die" before finally passing. Shakespeare's choice to make Emilia die beautifully and tragically force the audience to feel intense, deep emotions as they witness a much-loved character pass almost peacefully.

'Othello' also forces the audience into questioning. In Act 1 Scene 1 Iago states to Rodrigo "I am not what I am." He states this after he has already seemingly established his character to the audience. This quote changes the direction of the play and constructs Iago to be duplicitous. The quote "I am not what I am" also makes the audience think about the world around them in more depth. If Iago is not who he seems to be as stated; it makes the audience question the characteristics of those around them as  anyone can be hiding behind a facade similar to Iago's. It also makes them (the audience) question their own appearence. It makes them ask themselves if how others are seeing them is what they are really like on the inside. This makes the audience pay more attention to how the interact with others. Iago's character personifies false personality and forces the audience to question themselves and those around them.

The play allows us tosympathise with certain characters- in particular Othello. Evidently, Othello is violently cruel to other characters such as Desdemona but the audience still remains sympathetic to him. Othello is a victim of constant abuse through racial slurs and is forced into believing that his wife has had an affair with a fellow soldier. The audience is fond of their tragic hero and doesn't want to despise him. Being constantly refered to as "the Moor", an "Old, black ram", and "thick lips" by the other characters makes the audience feel sorrow for him. Shakespeare was able to produce sympathy for Othello within the audience by constructing him to be so victimised. This is taken even further  when the character begins to despise himself and his actions for resons based mostly on his race- something he has no control over. The character Othello allows the audience to sympathise on a deep emotional level.

Shakespeare's play 'Othello' still has an enduring value because of the way it forces the audience to think and feel. It is effective through the use of beautifully tragic last words, contradicting statements, and the construction of certain characters.