After putting pen to paper, literature is out of its author's control. Neither thought nor emotion can be forced, especially when considering a modern audience examining Shakespeare's 'Othello'. True, 'Othello' provokes thought with its exploration of the human condition, but its didactic demonstration of a woman's place is dated so much it is far from forcing modern thought. The emotionally affecting and intruiging characters - along with the simple conclusion that the plot is enjoyable - can rouse some emotion but in reality the language barrier means true emotional effect is lost in translation. 'Othello' endures because its writing is structurally appreciated and its writer is part of the literary canon: not because we are compelled to think or feel because of it. In fact, the inconsistencies riddling the piece, despite its endurance, ruin its remaining effect, rendering this lingering tragedy simply "a bloody farce". (1693, Rymer)

'Othello' is not meaningless: its examination of the human condition does prompt some thought in those who take the time to study it.
We, as human beings, are still shallow. Like Othello, we still make questionable decisions after the 'seed' of jealousy had been 'planted' in our minds. (Iago) Iago's description of jealousy as "the green-eyed monster which doth mock the meat it feeds on" has become a modern idiom. Cassio's loss of composure and cry of "Reputation, reputation, reputation!" emphasises his personal agony through both exclamation and repetition, using the play's bestial motif with hyperbole in "I have lost the immortal part of myself and what remains is bestial" to represent a loss we can understand and prompts us to think about how much we care about our own reputations.

We are still duplicitous. Like Iago, we lie: his frequent description as 'honest' in contrast to his statement at the very start of the play "I am not what I am" uses a healthy dose of dramatic irony to hammer home the theme of lies and prompt thought in audiences. His manipulations of tone and structure, moving frome nomble iambic pentameter and rhyming couplets to prose denoting "drown[ing] cats and blind[ing] puppies" ensures he is built on a lie, and we as an audience think about the language of others we know. More relatably, Othello's final reflection of "One not easily jealous" after he murders his wife out of jealousy makes us consider how honestly we know ourselves.

These lessons, however, cannot force us to think. Woven into 'Othello''s comment on timeless human qualities is a confusing collection of analysis of women. Emilia, though strong and willing to speak up, is stabbed for not listening to her husband's command of "get thee home". Desdemona's marriage is reffered to as a 'purchase' by Othello, suggesting the women are merely property. These dated representations of women far from force us to think: they instead work to discredit the rest of 'Othello''s messages and cause modern audiences to dismiss rather than discover.

'Othello' is not devoid of emotional connection. It is a well-crafted play with an enjoyable storyline. Its characters are lovable and interesting: we are drawn like Desdemona to Othello's tales of "Anthropophagi" and being "sold to slavery" and we love to hate Iago with his blunt declarations like "I hate the Moor", shady soliloquies and "motiveless malignity", as Coleridge puts it. There's something intriguing about the 'web' Iago spins to 'ensnare as great as fly as Cassio'.

Despite this, true emotional connection - the ability of the play to 'force' us to feel - is impossible with Shakespeare's 'Othello'. Shakespeare's tricky synatx and use of words like 'clyster-pipes' creates a language barrier: we struggle to read and understand his overly complicated language, let alone connect with it. Additionally, 'Othello' is fraught with inconsistencies" : every lesson it tells has an exception and the tale it tells is so unrealistic we dismess characters as stupid or incredibly lucky, hindering true emotional connection.

Shakespeare, and 'Othello' particularly, endures because the academics say it must: it is part of the literary canon and the way it utilises langauge is widely appreciated by scholars and school boards. To put it bluntly, 'Othello' is no longer understood without a study guide. When performered as a play in its original form as it was meant to be, it does not force us to think or feel. In fact, it is far from it. Any meaning or emotion that may have hid between the lines of 'Othello' is lost through language. The power of 'Othello''s message or its thoughts is not what allows it to endure. 'Othello' far from does the impossibility of forcing different people with different readings to think or feel: it simply endures because of the throne the title 'Shakespearian' places it on.