Why do we watch what is poison? Why do we as the audience continue to listen, watch, read Shakespeare’s Othello? What does it make us think and feel? Othello is considered a tragedy because we end up caring for Othello. Jealousy leads and ends with tragedy. Othello’s final speech is a tragedy. These points will explain how the audience ends up feeling and it makes then think.

From the beginning of the play Othello starts to fall. And he falls from a great height. he falls because of his fatal flaw, jealousy. Tragedies can only be considered tragedies if we care for the hero. Because the whole part of the play is to watch the heroes downfall. Othello’s life starts at a heigh point. He has a high rank in the Army, has just married Desdemona who adores him, and has just won a battle. But we know he has to begin at the highest point so we can watch him fall. Although, while Othello is falling we end up caring for him and sympathising him. The whole time we know that Iago manipulating him and that Desdemona is not cheating on him. But Othello doesn’t know that. we sympathise him because some how every thing falls into place for Iago, being the villain, rather than for Othello, the hero. Othello is driven mad with his demands for truth and him ending up having a fit. The audience thinks “oh poor Othello, he is being driven mad by Iago”. Even though in the end othello does kill his innocent wife he then finds out that he was being played all along which is the most important part of any tragedy- the hero realises his mistakes.

We think and feel with this play because we realise how far our emotions can take us. In Othello’s case jealousy is the stand out emotion. we learn more about “… the green-eyed monster…” and its effects on not only us, but the people around us. Jealousy is what killed Othello, Desdemona, and Emelia. Its only human nature to become jealous but Shakespeare shows us an over-exaggerated result of jealousy. Murder. The audience is shocked by the amount of people who end up dead in this play and by the fact it was all because of one man and his jealousy. Iago was always jealous of Othello which was evident in act one where he stayed “i hate the Moor”. Here, from day one, we know that Iago hated, and was jealous of Othello. The reason for his hate is not said specifically and it could be for a number of reasons; Othello having a higher rank, maybe he was in love with Desdemona, we don’t know. Iago’s jealousy resulted on Othello’s jealousy which left three characters dead and another probably tortured and murdered. A tragedy. 

Othello’s final monologue leaves many people with many different feelings and many questions. Some are left unsatisfied, some confused, some are left with sympathy for Othello. In his final speech Othello asks to be told about his true self, not as “…easily jealous…” or anything but as himself. but some question this because; wasn’t he easily jealous? This leaves a reaction as well as the fact that Othello stabs himself after his great speech. In true Shakespeare fatal hero, tragedy Othello kills himself. Too much guilt. 

Othello lasts as a play because of its great tragedy and as a result of the tragedy the audience is forced to think about the consequences and feel the death of Othello, Desdemona and Emilia leaving us with a moral of; jealousy can and will break you but you must fight it instead of letting it slowly kill. Othello is poison and yet we still let it last. 