A play that makes us think is a documentary. A play that makes us feel is a romantic comedy. Neither will last. Shakespeare’s Othello does both and has, and will continue to stand the test of time. Much alike various other works that have lasted, such as Macbeth or Romeo and Juliet, Othello is a Tragedy - arguably the form that will inherently generate the most emotion. But Othello is not a simple tale of a hero falling from grace, it also presents an intimate insight into the fallibility of flawed aspects, not of Othello, but of human nature itself. Shakespeare’s aim is not to simply present an argument or develop a superficial narrative. He wanted to deepen a trench of emotive plot line with questioning about our own, inevitable failure. He wanted to illicit a response from the audience that was not only passionate, but engaged in a concept of our own demise.

Shakespeare’s element of thought in his tragedy encapsulates various ideas and matters, however this discussion of the ‘tragedy of human nature’, in particular Othello’s fallacious judgement and subjectivity / perspective on a matter. Othello sees himself (as many of his peers do) as a man of honour, integrity and justice. In Act 3 Scene 3, Othello responds to Iago’s claims of Desdemona’s disloyalty with: “No, Iago, without proof I will not doubt; And with doubt, prove; And with proof that there is nothing but - Away with love and jealousy”. Othello claims that his judgement will be without love and jealousy, however at this point Iago’s seeds of doubt are already beginning to sprout in Othello’s mind. Othello believes he is objective, however he - more anyone else - can truly be untainted by bias and subjectivity. It is part of human nature. Iago responds with “If impotence and strong circumstance, which will lead directly to the door of truth, will give you satisfaction - then have’t” (3.3). This statement is duplicitous, full of sophism and generally false. Iago attempts to counteract Othello’s need for “Occular proof” by suggesting that his circumstantial evidence will “lead directly to the door of truth”. Othello accepts this - however this is wrong, as circumstantial evidence, such as Iago’s dream or the handkerchief can never provide direct evidence as he suggests. Anyone who had a clear mind would reject this, yet Othello doesn’t, proving his bias nature at this point.

Passion and insecurity, inherent to all, is blurring Othello’s judgement. As discussed above - Othello accepts concepts and ideas that are fallacious and deceptive. Iago furthers this blurred judgement by presenting the handkerchief. “Loose the napkin, and he will find it […] It is of holy kind”. Iago presents the napkin as “Holy” - it is indisputable, physical evidence of Desdemona’s disloyalty - again a false claim. Iago synthesises the evidence and manages to get Othello to trust it (particularly because of Iago’s reputation - “Honest Iago” - but also a result of Othello’s own insecurities). Eventually, Othello reaches a climactic point of the opacity of truth: “Lie with her, lie on her, They lie on her and belie to her”. He begins confusing lying with and lying about. “Handkerchief - confessions - handkerchiefs”. Othello then associates handkerchiefs with direct evidence - a confession. The stagnated form of this line also generates confusion and doubt in the audience. “Nature would not invest in such nightmares without instruction”. At this point, Othello is considering his feeling so terrible could not possibly be without reason. As Phillip Walker compared - it is like our cliché “Where there is smoke, there is fire”, except all the smoke is in Othello’s head. There is no fire. “Noses, ears and eyes - Is’t true?”. His own imagery is intertwined with the evidence. Eventually the stage direction ‘Othello falls in a trance’ is the pinnacle of the moment. Ironically, flawed proof and judgement becomes Othello’s downfall - it is later discussed / referred to by Londonce: “Look upon this loaded bed”. There is evidence of what human nature and flawed judgement creates - death. This is what Othello teaches us to think about.

Shakespeare then uses passion and emotion to enhance the questioning and thought. The dramatic form is so suitable for this, as the intense, raw action of Othello’s epileptic fit or Iago’s true duplicitous nature is conveyed through soliloquies. This use of tragedy and the continuous down fall of a near perfect hero speaks to the audience’s emotive capacity. The feeling in Othello truely enhances the message and thought behind the action.

Othello combines these two aspects - thought and feeling in such a way that it invokes a response that is not simply recited by the viewer, but actively advocated and depicted with passion and true feeling. Othello will last long into the future.