Shakespeare’s ‘Othello’ lasts as it forces us to both think and feel about the parallels down between the outcomes of the play and todays society. The play represents a pessimistic view of humanity; indicating that humans are jealous and naive as well as showing that we are not always who we seem to be. There are many similarities down between the play and todays society giving it its enduring value and forcing us to think and feel.

Jealousy is an unscrupulous human emotion entangled in our biological nature. Shakespeare makes the play relatable to todays audience as we all feel moments of jealousy. Almost all the characters in the play show moments of raw jealousy indicating that there is and inherent darkness lingering within all of humanity. In Act 1, scene 3, Iago expresses his feelings towards Othello in a jealous soliloquy. He believes that Othello has “twisted [his] sheets” and has “done [his] office.” Iago is furious after hearing that Othello may have slept with his wife, as well as being overlooked for promotion is willing to act on “suspicion… as if for surety”. This soliloquy is written in prose to indicate his evil motivations and his devilish character. Lagos willingness to believe the rumour shows how jealousy has caused him to forget his logic and reasoning. Shakespeare makes us think and feel about this as it is relatable to todays society as there have been many accusations of adultery which often lead to murderous thoughts. Furthermore, the audience feels sympathetic instead of disquasled with Othello in the final moments of the play as they understand and feel empathetic in his situation. The play makes us think and feel about the enduring and everlasting feeling of jealousy.

The plays illustration of Othello as a naive character draws many parallels to todays society. Othello thinks that he is the best. Often referred to as “valiant”, Othello boasts about the services he “has done the signory” as well as believing he has a “perfect soul”. This indicates his egoism and pride as well as his naivety. The iambic pentameter used also makes him seem like he is the best. For example, Donald Trump often refers to the size of his wallet as an indication of his power. The play draws many parallels between its pessimistic society and todays issues.