Why do we feel for Othello and not Iago? Othello succumbs to the cold clutches of jealousy, strangles his wife, kills himself, and yet we still feel sympathy for him. This is why Shakespeare’s plays last, as they force us to think and feel for ourselves, creating sympathy for even the most unsympathetic character. Yet Iago starts off with being overlooked and has vile rumours floating, and we as an audience don’t ‘feel’ for him. he has lost  his identity, unknown even to himself. this essay will highlight the strangeness, as to why we feel for Othello, and not for Iago.

Iago’s schemes and clever manipulation are the foundations for our sympathy for Othello, as we know it is not (entirely) Othello’s fault. It would be unwise to think that the culmination of the play was entirely resulting because of jealousy, though it does play a part, as every character is indeed dipped into the pool of jealousy. Iago’s jealousy, it seems, comes from the overlooking for him for Lieutenant, and instead Othello promotes “one Michael Cassio”. Iago complains Cassio “never set a squadron in a field” and that he is just a ‘numbers man’. There is also a rumour that Othello “twixt (Iago’s) sheets” and slept with Iago’s wife, Emilia, and although disproven, the “mere suspicion of it will do as if for surety” for Iago, almost as f Iago wanted a reason to go after Othello. If the play of Othello could be boiled down down into one quote, it would be: “O beware, my lord, of jealousy! It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock the meat it feeds on”. Shakespeare uses the traits of a monster as comparison to jealousy, as a monster is destructive, malicious, and terrifying. Although Iago has been overlooked for Lieutenant, and has a rumour that his wife is in an affair, Shakespeare portrays this character as “the devil’, and so we think his values and beliefs are wrong, and therefore don’t ‘feel’ for him.

Iago’s identity is unknowable, and as stated by Sarah Harrison in ‘The Identity of Iago’, “Iago is lost even to himself”. early in the play in Act 1 Scene 1, Iago repeatedly mentions to Brabantio that he cannot reveal his “outward action” to anyone (especially the audience). the line “daws at which to peck at,” emphasises his attempts to keep what really is going on in his heart and mind. Iago claims “i am not what I am”, suggesting that he is not what he appears to be. This line is actually an inversion of God’s line, “I am what I am” (Exodus 3:14) which is keeping in alignment with the play’s portrayal of Iago and the devil. Iago has no identity, yet we still don’t ‘feel’ for him, yet ‘think’ that he is the real villain of the play… Why is our human nature allowing this? Do we ‘feel’ that he is a jerk who wants complete destruction of those around him? Iago starts a recurring motif of comparing humans to primal animals. He starts this when he calls Othello (indirectly) “a beast with two backs”, and continues with his portrayal of jealousy, a primal human emotion, with a “monster”. He uses his manipulation skills to anger Brabantio, further continuing this motif, when he states “even now, an ld black ram is topping your white ewe”. Finally this motif continues when Lordovico begins a speech with “O Spartan Dog”, denouncing Iago, as spartan dogs where known for their maliciousness and savageness. This motif highlights that at the end of the day, we as humans are no more than simplistic animals. Iago knows this, and challenges the audience to think and realise that humans are just animals. Do we now feel for him? Shakespeare challenges us to see the bigger picture, and although he sacrifices Iago’s honour and image, he gets his message across.

In conclusion, the fact that we know of Iago’s schemes to create havoc, negates our feelings of sympathy for him. Iago is not necessarily one person, but more of an image for a whole, that we as humans think and feel exactly what we see, which is ultimately the reason for Othello’s downfall. Had he not listened to emotion, and listened to reason, Desdemona would not be dead.      